A crab has an organ known as the Statolith. The little bubble that it sits inside of is called a Statocyst. This organ is the equivalent to that of an accelerometer. It helps the crab know which way is up. Unlike humans, crabs grow up in bursts. They shed their skin (carapace) during this statge. As the skin grows back, they exhibit an interesting behaviour:

They pick up a little pebble and rub against it to let a new statocyst form in the new carapace.

An Austrian investigator noticed this behaviour and did the following:

He put a few crabs inside of a little aquarium which contained no pebbles. Instead it had some iron filings. The crabs then rubbed themselves against these filings to form their new statocysts. Then he came over near the aquarium with a magnet and managed to completely mess up the crab's sense of orientation. He could even fool the crab into walking up the wall.

This is a good example of explain, predict and controlling behaviour.

---

The great questions in any field are the ones which an intelligent child asks and then stops asking once he's unable to find the answers.

4 questions that an intelligent child asks:

- what goes on when we perceive?
- what goes on when we move?
- what goes on when we feel emotions?
- what goes on when we learn or remember?

Psychology and Cognitive science is a field where we try to **explain, predict and control** the behaviour of humans. This field has the potential to do more harm than physics has managed to.

---

The questions of perception, movement, emotions and learning are all intertwined. For example, let's take the one of the simplest possible question in perception:

*How do I see a single line as a line?*
*Why does the line stay vertical when I tilt my head?*
*Why does the line not move when I move?*

As you might've observed, when we try to deal with the problem of perception, the unanswered questions about movement start coming in.

*How do we move relative to the objects we're looking at?*

---

The following is a conversation between a doctor and a patient suffering from eye paralysis:

**Doctor**: *How do you know something is amiss?*

**Patient**: *Every time I want to move my eyes the world jumps.*

Note how the person never says that his eyes are paralysed. You cannot dissociate the problem of perception from the problem of movement.

---

We have maps of the world that transcend what's immediately given to thes senses. How is that done?

The first step in any new field is to know what to be astonished at.

Being on stage and being in love are not so different.

---

Any science tries to **explain, predict and control**. Astrophysics for example has been good at explain and predict. But it has not been able to control much so far.


Psychology is a science that utilizes other sciences like physics and social science to try to explain behaviour. 

Physiology is that science that tries to account for the function of organisms. Things like tissues, body fluids, etc. This is done by calling upon the other sciences like physics or chemistry wherever required.

On the other side is Sociology. It tries to account for the behaviour of organisms in groups. Also by calling upon other sciences.

Psychology is firmly planted in the middle.

---

Science right now is organized in the form of a hierarchy. With the base science being physics. Every other science "sits on top" of the assumptions made by physics. For example, psychology builds on top of physiology and physiology is the physics of living beings.

But one must note that although this reliance on the more fundamental sciences is necessary, it is not sufficient.

The laws of falling bricks is known. f = ma

The laws of falling cats are also known. Even if it's dropped upside down, the cat will turn around and land on all 4. It is very different from a brick. A cat has a otolith. It's an organ which informs it about it's orientation with respect to gravity.

The laws for a man standing on the edge of a bridge would be very different from the other two. Once the person is off the edge, the same laws would apply to him as that of the brick. But while he's still on the edge, the complexity is much much higher. Maybe he's doing it because he's high or drugs. Or it could be that someone said something mean to him.

As you might see here, although the lower sciences are necessary to explain the man's behaviour. They are nowhere close to being sufficient.

---

A person durnig WW2 got an eye injury which led to blindness in the central part of his field of view in both of his eyes. Interestingly enough, when he is shown lines that pass through the blind zone of his eyes, he insists that he does see the entire line. His vision completes patterns which are predictable. Patterns like the texture of a wall.

But when he sees a man such that the face is in his blind spot, he says that he's not able to see the man's face. 

The scientists then used a fancy optical illusion to make the man "see "